# Something Political

DSC160 Data Science and the Arts - Final Project - Generative Arts - Spring 2020

Project Team Members: 
- Andy Do, ando@ucsd.edu
- Saieashwar Mukund, samukund@ucsd.edu
- Chase Oden, coden@ucsd.edu
- Matthew Widjaja, mwidjaja@ucsd.edu
- Chris Wynne, cwynne@ucsd.edu


## Abstract

(10 points) 

Our concept revolves around training a GPT-2 model on Reddit comments from conflicting political subreddits to possibly create a centrist view of politics. We’ll be using OpenAIs pretrained GPT2 model as a base, as well as use Pushshift for scraping from Reddit. Our training data will be sourced from subreddits on Reddit of conflicting political ideals, such as r/Republican and r/democrats. We chose Reddit because it is a forum with moderation, so we assume most of the comments will be coherent at the very least. After training, we hope that our system will combine the views found in both polar different subreddits and somehow come out as a centrist view on the political views mentioned. Our hypothesis is that a "successful" centrist model will respond to political issues with suggestions or ideas that have been taken from both right and left leaning ideologies.

To present our results, we'll be personally looking at various generated responses from our GPT2 model when trained on left, right, and centrist points of view. Originally, we wanted to post to Reddit to quantitatively identify how well our responses fared among strangers, but given the current complicated political situation we decided against it. Instead, we opted to send prompts and generated responses to people we know and then inform them after the fact that the responses were artificially generated. We believe our project is interesting because it has the potential to show the main talking points of left, right, and centrist political views. 

We’ll be referencing the following papers/ sites in the creation of our project:

How to use GPT-2:
https://www.gwern.net/GPT-2

Article about bots used in politics:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/19331681.2018.1448735

Article about bots posing as humans:
https://www.topbots.com/can-bots-manipulate-public-opinion/

How GPT-2 performs when trained on Reddit data:
https://www.reddit.com/r/SubSimulatorGPT2/


## Data and Model

(10 points) 

The data we used was scraped from the subreddits r/Republican and r/Democrats. We scraped posts with more than 5 comments and removed the phrases "deleted" and "I am a bot". This was to help remove irrelevant data to feed to our model, since the out model, the 124M GPT-2 architecture, limits our dataset to 1 MB. We have 3 1-MB training datasets and three different models. One is trained on only data from r/Democrats, one is trained on only data from r/Republicans, and the last is trained on equal amounts of both. The "temperature" parameter was set at 0.8, as we felt this gave the best mix of interesting yet sensical answers. We have given these models names as the output they create is "human". Their names are Carlisle (Republican), Creighton (Democrat), and Kuzco (Both).
  - [https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group-5/tree/master/data/matt_results] (training text files).
  - [https://minimaxir.com/2019/09/howto-gpt2/] (article describing GPT-2 and the tool we used to train it). 

## Code

(20 points)

- scraping / preprocessing code: 

This code scrapes reddit posts/comments from the subreddits described above. All necessary install statements are present in the notebook. However, we have included the scraped data in the repo so it is not necessary to run this code. 

https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group-5/blob/master/code/tatami_scraping.ipynb

- training / generative methods code:

This is the code that trains the model and generates the text output (saving to a file). It takes a long time to train the model, but a local model and instructions for how to download/install the necessary libraries in the technical dependencies section at the bottom. However, if training on a GPU on datahub, it only takes around 10 minutes to run. Make sure to set is_local to false

https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group-5/blob/master/code/cwynne_gpt2.ipynb


## Results

### Prompt 1

>[title]
You say: "Police violence is problematic." - They hear: "I am fine with looting and arson." - You say: "I want criminal arsonists arrested." - They hear: "I want cops to break up peaceful protests and beat them up."<br/><br/>
[selftext]
Just a quick guide to what the other party understands from your positions. For your discussions and debates on this sub and elsewhere. I didn't come up with it, I merely translated it from memory. Can't find the original source, sorry.

<b>Creighton Model Response</b>

>[comment]You guys are so fucking stupid. If only we could just assume that the police state is real and that there’s some kind of collective punishment system.

This is a comment generated by the Democrat Creighton model which I would describe as heavy on the liberal left side of the political spectrum. The statement is very hyperbolic as it compares the U.S government response to the protests to police states. While the police response to the recent protest have been notably violent, they are a far cry from the full extent of an actual police state, which is comparable to what we have seen with North Korea's extreme supervision of its citizens or historically, Germany under the Nazi Regime and Italy under Benito Mussolini.

<b>Carlisle Model Response</b>

>[comment]I think we should focus on how we deal with crimes. All the illegals and all the crime that happens with the illegal immigrants.

This is an example of what I would call a very obvious Republican comment, and the model for these comments most likely supports President Trump (if it could). It’s quite intriguing to see how the model has been able to use the term "illegals", and the grievance voiced against what the comment calls illegal immigrants is a common shared point by supporters of Trump. Overall, this comment definitely feels like a Republican response.

<b>Kuzco Model Response</b>

>[comment]I don't think the rioters should be arrested
The rioters are not peaceful protestors. They are rioters.

Here, we definitely see some contradiction on the Kuzco model. This model was generated by learning from both sides, so we are expecting to see some contradiction in the texts generated. Here, the text starts off by stating that they do not believe that rioters should be arrested. Naturally, we’d expect the follow-ups to be defending their point, however the model generates “The rioters are not peaceful protestors. They are rioters.” Contradictory, this suggests that the rioters are violent (in which arresting them would be a solution).

### Prompt 2

>[title]
Will the death of George Floyd and the Flynn/FBI case delegitimize law enforcement for the majority of American voters?

>[subtext]
It seems like a unique news cycle over the past 30 days in the sense that police (federal and local) have lost a lot of trust from American voters on the right and the left. Most right leaning folks I know were outraged about the FBI case on Flynn, and left leaning folks I know are even more outraged by the killing of George Floyd. Even people on the right that I know say that the officer who killed George Floyd was clearly in the wrong. <br/><br/>
The question then I have is: what long term impacts will this have on the political legitimacy of law enforcement in the United States? What impacts, on both sides, will this have on the electorate? (Note, not just the 2020 election, but longer term tectonic shifts with the republican and democratic bases.)

<b>Creighton Model Response</b>

>[comment] I don't think the protests will have any lasting impact on the political system. The protests will continue to be about people who are doing something wrong and the government is corrupt.

This was a comment generated by our Democrat Creighton model. The response not only very clearly answers the question that was asked in the prompt, but also takes on the persona of a very pessimistic leftist in saying that these protests will have very little impact in the future if the same people are in office. It is a rather cynical outlook on current events and whether or not any progress will be achieved, but this matches with some of the views of left-leaning people during this trying time, since many have lost hope in our government. They believe that the actions of authorities and lack of accountability will continue on and protests will always occur with little to no progress.


<b>Carlisle Model Response</b>

>[comment] 
The President of the United States has a very specific responsibility to ensure that the police have the best possible equipment and training to deal with an individual in the event of a terrorist attack. The Democrats are the only one in the world that doesn't regard law enforcement as a legitimate federal agency. The system works and the criminal justice system is very fair and fairly run. As a citizen I am outraged by the way that the media sensationalizes this situation. It is a distraction that keeps the public at a distance. Let me just say that the media has become a total disgrace to the country. They are not covering the real issues that are being raised. You can do whatever you want and I will not be a Democrat anymore. And I will not be proud to be a Democrat. I still have friends and family that are Democrats.

This was a comment that was created by our Republican bot, Carlisle. This bot, interestingly enough, takes on the persona of a citizen who has recently shifted from a Democratic stance and moved to the Republican Party. This bot’s answer to the question in the prompt is that the events occurring now provide the world with a chance to change without the use of violence and force, but feels that the Democrats are not showing any regard for the law and are being fooled by the media. This response, along with many of the other Republican generated comments, highlights the idea that the Republican Party is censored and is only selectively given a voice as the media is not covering the real issues that should be aware to the public. It also is interesting to see the word terrorist, since it is a word that would be thrown around a lot in Republican discussion but has no place in this context. Lastly, but most importantly, it is interesting to see the bot defend the President and solely put blame on the media, the public that it has been lying to, and the Democrats. 

<b>Kuzco Model Response</b>

>[comment]
I think both sides are going to find a way to protect themselves. They both have a vested interest in removing republicans and democrats from power. Both are authoritarian and want to be as free as possible in order to control the world as they have been and keep power as they have been for the last 75 years.

Not surprisingly, many of the comments created by Kuzco, the bot trained on both Republican and Democratic views, are contradicting and confusing. This response, however, showed a true, middle-ground view that discredits both parties. Although the comment does not answer the question that was posed in the prompt, it does reflect a centrist view and points out that both sides will constantly have a common interest in overpowering the other side and gaining more traction with the public’s votes. However, the bot proceeds to call both sides authoritarian and essentially calls both parties regimes that want to control the country. This is an exaggeration that the bot could have generated from either partys’ comments that it was trained on, since both parties, at least in the case of reddit discussions, like to slight the opposing side’s views.

Kuzco honorable mention comments:

>The Left have always been the darkest and most hate-filled groups. But the Left is still the best.

>Trump is the Antichrist and the Democrats are the Antichrist. Both are corrupt and the only way to stop them is to unite and defeat them. You can't make a bad guy get elected.


### Prompt 3


>[title]<br/>
Did the world forget about Coronavirus?<br/>
[subtext]<br/>
Since when were gatherings of more than 50 people allowed? Wasn't everyone in the mainstream media condemning states that even thought about reopening just two weeks ago? Politicians not wanting to sacrifice even one life in exchange for the economy?<br/><br/>
Weren't reopening protestors made the laughing stock and the butt of everyone's joke, being labelled as a danger to everyone around them? Now we're multiplying those #s in enormous fashion, with thousands of people crowded and shouting together.<br/><br/>
How quickly the tune changes when agendas align. This just blatantly lays bare to me the hypocrisy of politicians and media moguls who hold no principle dear. We now even have medical experts saying it's perfectly OK to go out and protest, so long as it's for this cause.<br/><br/>
Could anyone enlighten me as to why this isn't just a blatant, transparent display of hypocrisy?<br/><br/>
Note: I fully support policy changes that will reduce police brutality, and justice for George Floyd. But I also can't ignore how quickly we've all just pulled a full 180 on our own principles and standards.


<b>Creighton Model Response</b>

The model has really locked on to the media and the coronavirus as it seems within the time frame where we scraped comments, the issue of George Floyd and police brutality are a relatively new subject.

For example, this comment doesn’t make much sense regarding the virus as it seems to have come from other comments regarding the media discrediting politicians or public figures however it reflects the general consensus of the democratic subreddit towards the media.

>[comment]I'm not a big fan of the media being so mean and cowardly in their attempts to discredit the virus. The media is a fucking disgrace.</br>
[comment]There's so much trash in the media</br>
[comment]I'm just hoping people stop beaming at corrupt media.</br>
[comment]I'm not a big fan of the media being too soft on Trump</br>
[comment]The media is just the propaganda machine for corrupt politicians.</br>

While other comments address the police brutality segment :

>[comment]If it weren't for the fact that police are bad[subtext]lmao </br>

And others talk about the virus :

>[comment]Can you imagine what it would have looked like if the authorities had taken those people out?</br>
[comment]Sounds like the real reason why Coronavirus was a bigger deal.</br>
I'd love to see more of Coronavirus. I would love to see the United States take a more active role in caring for the sick and dying. </br>

What I notice about these generated comments is that the model seems to pick out important words from the prompt and runs with it without much context being taken into account such as “coronavirus”, “police” and “media”. Clearly the democratic subreddit hates the media and their portrayal of politicians. 

Funnily enough after perusing the original dataset and comparing to the model’s comments certain generated comments call out the virus as a hoax however in the original dataset regarding the coronavirus being a hoax was more of commenters quoting Trump and others who called it a hoax

>[comment]I think Coronavirus is a hoax.</br>
[comment]Sounds like a hoax.</br>
[comment]I've been seeing the same people talking about the coronavirus on Reddit</br>
[comment]How about Coronavirus? Is there another one?</br>
[comment]I’m not a fan of it.</br>
[comment]I think there’s a conspiracy here.</br>
[comment]Right.</br>
[comment]That's like the democrats saying the government doesn't need to stay open.</br>
[comment]This is great news. It's a hoax.</br>
[comment]The coronavirus is another hoax.</br>

We see many comments regarding the bigger more common topics and although there are likely less comments about the protests, these are some of the more coherent responses to the post

>[comment]I'm sorry. I know too. I just hope more people don't go out and go out to protest.</br>
[comment]I have been coming to this corona for the last few weeks. Just because some people were protesting doesn't mean they are unsafe.</br>

<b>Carlisle Model Response</b>

On the other hand, it honestly feels like the Republican subreddit is very self interested and doesn’t seem to be on topic at all compared to the democratic subreddit overall however have similar sentiment towards the media.

>[comment]I think it's time to stop talking about it.  The media isn’t interested in talking about it.  They are focused on their own agendas.  They are willing to talk about the way they want to talk about our own government and what they want to talk about.  It’s not the government that is about to tell them to shut up or to tell them to buy more guns. </br>

However most comment thread devolve into different tangents

>[comment]I'm not a communist</br>
I'm a socialist</br>
[comment]I'm not a communist</br>
I'm a libertarian</br>
I'm a democrat</br>
[comment]I don’t think this is the leftist thing to do</br>
[comment]I'm not a libertarian</br>
I'm a democrat</br>
I'm a republican</br>
I was a leftist when I was a kid. I was really against everything communism was</br>
[comment]I don't understand why people are so eager to move to the right. It's a huge change for the economy and for the world.</br>
[comment]I'm not a communist</br>
I'm a democrat</br>
I'm a republican</br>
I'm a democrat</br>
I'm a republican</br>

>[comment]Trumpism</br>
[comment]There is absolutely NO reason for Trump to be doing this.</br>
[comment]The US is a communist state.</br>
[comment]Trump doesn't want to be visited by the Chinese</br>
[comment]I don't know how liberals can accept that there is no real economic reason for protesting in the first place.</br>
I see a lot of power struggles going on in the US right now.</br>
[comment]I'm a Democrat now and I don't think I'm going to get fat.</br>
[comment]The left is just like the right.</br>

I don't know if I agree with everything that they say. I do believe that it's a great thing to have a president of the United States. But I don't think that there's any economic reason to protest[comment]I think this is a bigger problem than just protest. It's really a distraction. It's a distraction if you ask me. I don't think people realize how much more people are being oppressed and to get a job and to pay for your health care.
>[comment]Fuck Trump.</br>
[comment]The left and the media are both poisonous.</br>
[comment]I don't know. I think the left is crazy.</br>
[comment]I don't know. I'm a republican.</br></br>
[comment]I don't think we all remember the horrors of the Vietnam War.</br>
[comment]This is the most painful thing I've ever read.</br>
[comment]I'm glad we can get to the truth and not the political theater.</br>
[comment]I can't believe people are so focused on trump trump and the American people.</br>
[comment]I think the media should have charged with covering up the truth and showing the kind of "classy" </br>reporting it is.  If it wasn't for the fact that a number of the people who were charged with the crime aren't like me.
[comment]I don't want to make the case that trump trump is a criminal. I think this is just a convenient distraction from the actual crime.  The crime was a political term. The politicization of the crime is also a distraction.</br>
[comment]Personally I don't think this is a scandal. I think trump trump and the American people deserve better than this.</br>
[comment]It’s laughable how ignorant Americans are.</br>

A lot of the comments end up talking about nothing related to the topics discussed while instead talking about things never mentioned in the original post usually defending or attacking Trump.

<b>Kuzco Model Response</b>

For this prompt, the third model seems to come together and feel like an actual combination of the two styles of comments obtained from the other two models.

>[comment]Bernie is the best candidate to combat the left</br>
[comment]The left is gonna shut down the country</br>
[comment]I just voted for Bernie and I find the protesters to be an enemy of the state</br>
[comment]No</br>
[comment]How about we hold those people accountable?</br>

With comments arguing against each other in some threads reflecting the strong opinions of those on both subreddits. We see strong left and right opinions reflected rather equally across these comments going back and forth in a centrist-like fashion showing that the model managed to adopt these two opposing points of view

>[comment]Communists should have the right to protest. This is why we need to get impeachment hearings.</br>
[comment]This is why we need to actually make the case that people should be able to protest without being arrested. Why the whole world hates the Republicans</br>
[comment]That’s why it was a good idea to just keep the mentally ill and mentally ill from protesting.</br>
[comment]I’m not sure what their problem is with protesting. It's hard to think of a reason to protest when you're being treated badly and some will even go home</br>
[comment]The left always has a point.</br>
[comment]The left has a point</br>
[comment]When you think of protest I don't know how people who disagree with the left are going to be happy to shut down another city.</br>
[comment]It’s not just protesting. It's an entire right-wing movement. What you're saying is that there's a right-wing movement that is more than willing to literally shut down a city. They're going to try to get it shut down because they prefer them to the left.</br>
[comment]I'm not a big fan of protesting.</br>
[comment]How bad is it that there are riots? What is the point of protesting if you're not even being arrested?</br>
[comment]I love protesting. Protesting is great. I don't have a problem with people protesting. I also don't like how the left is doing it.</br>
[comment]People need to stop protesting. This is not about us.</br>


## Discussion

From our models and the various prompts they trained on we saw results that corresponded with what we expected given the training data of each model. The Democrat Creighton and Republican Carlisle models generated responses that were very much in line with their respective political parties, although we noted that they would express their points rather strongly. The combined Kuzco model had issues however, as it generally didn’t cohesively combine the left and right political views and would instead tend to voice contradictory views from both side. On occasion the Kuzco model would generate something close to a Centrist view, but would generally view both left and right political parties in distinctly negative lights. 

Our results are culturally innovative because it shows some of the most popular approaches that people of the left and right political sides tend to have towards popular political discussion topics. Our generative approach is different from traditional cultural production because we aren’t just taking opinions off the internet and trying to match them to arbitrary prompts, but we’re synthesizing entirely new opinions based off of a large dataset of a single political ideal. 

We were happy to explore the political issues most talked about by the left and right wing political sides, as well as to see what happens if we were to combine the two. Our generated outputs relate to how people on Reddit feel regarding their respective political parties. It’s interesting to see what topics are most frequently talked about and what kinds of combinations we can expect to see in generated text from a particular party. This gives us insight into what a political party in general is thinking and helps to simulate a political party’s response to a new discussion on forthcoming topics.

We ran into ethical concerns when initially approaching our project because our original intention was to generate Reddit posts and comments and post these onto political discussion subreddits to get quantitative feedback. However, given the current state of the world with Coronavirus and protests, we decided to instead evaluate our results ourselves so as to not accidentally coerce people into action during these trying times.

In the future we would like to go back and try posting our generated texts to Reddit to quantify how popular they are in their respective political groups. It would also be beneficial to post them to a neutral political board and see what political party other people think the post belongs to. In improving our work, it’d be worthwhile to linearly interpolate political views together to see the differences in responses based on how much the model takes from one side versus the other. 


## Team Roles

Andy Do: Analysis on the Creighton, Carlisle, and Kuzco model for a given prompt. Worked on filling in the slides for the presentation.

Saieashwar Mukund: Helped create scraper to obtain text from top posts and comments from reddit submissions from r/Republican and r/democrats. Also analyzed each model's responses to Prompt 1 and compared them to one another.

Chase Oden: Tested ideas and worked on general direction for project. Assembled powerpoint and the github README.md file. Formatted final video presentation. Analyzed final results in discussion section. 

Matthew Widjaja: 

Chris Wynne: Got the GPT-2 Pipeline working and trained it on the dataset, as well as helped decide criteria for choosing posts to analyze with the models. Wrote the data, references, and technical dependencies sections.


## Technical Notes and Dependencies

### Additional Libraries:

GPT-2 Tool:
https://github.com/minimaxir/gpt-2-simple

Tensorflow Version:
1.15

Pushshift API (for Reddit scraping): 
https://pypi.org/project/psaw/

 - Pandas
 - Numpy
 
 Additional Notes:
 
 For loading a saved local model, you need to have a local version of gpt-2-simple and the local model data. 
 This model data is too large to fit on the github repo, so we have included a link to a google drive file with both the modified library code and the local models. These files should be in the same parent directory as this repository.
 
Here is the link (you must unzip the file): https://drive.google.com/file/d/11U_56F8S0ZdDexSjvb8Vsgy4CU8Plb9S/view?usp=sharing

## Reference
How to use GPT-2:
https://www.gwern.net/GPT-2

Article describing GPT-2 and the tool we used to train it:
https://minimaxir.com/2019/09/howto-gpt2/ 

Article about bots used in politics:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/19331681.2018.1448735

Article about bots posing as humans:
https://www.topbots.com/can-bots-manipulate-public-opinion/

How GPT-2 performs when trained on Reddit data:
https://www.reddit.com/r/SubSimulatorGPT2/

